# HCL 201

#### Built in functions

Terraform has several (94 as of this writing) built in functions that are useful when deploying infrastructure
* Official function documentation is 
[here](https://www.terraform.io/docs/configuration/functions.html)
* Some of the function documentation provided by hashicorp is terse, and difficult to apply. Ned Bellavance wrote this
awesome blog series on [Terraform Functions](https://nedinthecloud.com/2018/10/05/terraform-fotd-wrap-up/) which includes
detailed explanation and working examples of many of the functions.

A few examples of functions
```hcl
# use file() to read a file's contents into a varible
my_var = file("path.txt")

# use concat() to combine two or more lists into a single list.
instance_ids = concat(aws_instance.db.*.id, aws_instance.web.*.id)

# use cidrhost() to return an IP address from a cidr range
host_ip = cidrhost("10.12.127.0/20", 16)
```

#### Templates

Terraform supports templates so that variables, or external files can be used and terraform variables inserted

Ex. user_data.tpl script that could be provided to an ec2 instance. user_data scripts run on first boot
```
#!/bin/bash

# update the packages
yum update -y

# Set the hostname to the public IP address of the instance
hostname ${PUBLIC_IP}
```

```hcl
# define a template_file for the userdata.sh script
data "template_file" "my_userdata" {
  template = file("./user_data.tpl")
  vars {
    PUBLIC_IP = aws_instance.my_instance.public_ip
  }
}

# Deploy the ec2 instance using the templated userdata file
resource "aws_instance" "my_instance"{
  ami = "ami-1234567"
  instance_type = "t2.micro"
  user_data = data.template_file.my_userdata
}
```

#### Math
Simple math can be performed in interpolations

* Add (+), Subtract (-), Multiply (*), and Divide (/) for float types
* Add (+), Subtract (-), Multiply (*), Divide (/), and Modulo (%) for integer types

```hcl
# create 3 aws vm instances, each with a tag called "InstanceNumber" with the unique instance # (ex. 1, 2, 3)
resource "aws_instance" "my_instances" {
  count = 3
  ami = "ami-123456"
  instance_type = "t2.micro"
  tags {
    InstanceNumber = "${ count.index + 1 }"
  }
}
```

#### State files
Terraform stores a database referred to a "state file" that maps HCL resource names to actual provisioned resources. 

By default, terraform stores the state file in the project terraform.tfstate file and keeps a backup in 
terraform.tfstate.backup. Losing the state file after resources have been deployed means that the resources 
can no longer be updated/deleted by terraform (without re-importing them into the state).

As such, it is a very good idea to keep the state file in a durable location. Here is a
[list](https://www.terraform.io/docs/backends/types/index.html) of supported backend types

The example below keeps the state file in an s3 bucket, rather than in the project directory
```hcl
terraform {
  backend "s3" {
    bucket = "mybucket"
    key    = "path/to/my/key"
    region = "us-east-1"
  }
}
```

Terraform Enterprise is one of the supported remote state backends and is configured automatically for projects
residing in a TFE workspace. 

Below is an example ofa terraform enterprise state configuration (does not have to be explicitly defined in TFE projects)
```hcl
terraform {
  backend "atlas" {
    name = "TFE_ORGANIZATION/TFE_WORKSPACE"
    address = "https://app.terraform.io" 
  }
}
```

#### Terraform Plugins
Terraform providers and provisioners are provided via plugins. Each plugin exposes an implementation for a specific
service, such as AWS, or provisioner, such as bash. Plugins are executed as a separate process and communicate with
the main Terraform binary over an RPC interface.

The provider plugins distributed by HashiCorp are automatically installed by terraform init. Third-party plugins
(both providers and provisioners) can be manually installed into the user plugins directory, located at
%APPDATA%\terraform.d\plugins on Windows and ~/.terraform.d/plugins on other systems.

Developing a plugin is simple. The only knowledge necessary to write a plugin is basic command-line skills and basic
knowledge of the Go programming language. Read more about it [here](https://www.terraform.io/docs/plugins/basics.html)

[Back to Main page](../README.md)

[Next Git and Github](github.md)

